And now I talk a little bit about the Dharma, and of course you all know.
You all know because you already get, you already presume.
So it's not something new, I have to say, I just will say what I used to say and again.
And now, again, I will say Dharma practice is really a belief in atrocity, and that's my belief.
It's one of the best things we can do while we are in life in the Rinpoque world.
I'm not just talking, kind of saying that, but really I believe that in my heart,
in the samsara, in all, there are 300 major things in the samsara.
One thing is more outwardly activity that we do, and one thing is more connect with the heart.
Most of the time we in the samsara or in this world are carried by the force of what things need to
do externally.
And that all activity has also involved the same thing.
It involves the mental activity, physical activity, verbal activities.
So most of the time people, or even the animals, are spending time to do in the world externally,
to try to do, and spending all the efforts of the mental, physical, verbal, to complete something
for this life.
It's important for all the people who are in the world, to have the same activity,
and to have the same experience as the rest of the world.
It's important for all the mental, physical, verbal activities to complete something.
It really is very important.
It's a very important, surviving purpose.
But that is on the kind of wider way of thinking, looking from the wider point of view.
It's a very short time.
What means short time?
Short time of our life spans.
What if life spans we have 80 years, 70 years, 60 years, 40 years, 30, or 20 years?
And even then, during that purpose we're trying to follow something is a component to our
physically, mentally,
and globally for that purpose, we're spending almost our 80% all effort for that purpose.
And many times we achieve the purpose of what we really would like to do in that life sometimes.
But always, strongly, there's never always completely satisfaction, or is that happened in our
country?
You really know it, even in football, still it has need more to do it, it is continually stronger.
You will see those all activities more related with external.
And then more inwardly related is how they connect with our own heart and mind.
And then there's a difference, but I think you often mentioned that we're more connected to our
heart and natural quality with our mind.
We're trying to do something with that, that is more rewarding and is more satisfaction, passion,
and that trend, you know, what we will be able to develop, we will have more joy, more richness in
this life,
but not just only that, also that will really become a big comfort for where we live, define this
world.
And then in Buddhism, we believe next life, so there it will be very beautiful comfort for the next
life.
So this, that what we do love really inwardly, that is really so rewarding, so stable, is
continually giving the peace, the happy and the satisfactions.
So, this is the best way to do it, and this is the best way to do it.
And this is the best way to do it, and this is the best way to do it.
And this is the best way to do it, and this is the best way to do it, and this is the best way to
do it.
And that is simple and general, clearly to say, it is really the practicing the Dharma, that
because this Dharma practices our heart, and the quality of the name, our own nature of the mind.
And that is, then, in our own practicing lineage, generally, every practice lineage is open and
says, you should have always three frames.
And that is, then, and I also had an opportunity to mention that three times, and now I'm going to
say again that one more time.
And those are simple, just beginning novel, middle novel, and ending novel.
And what is that novel is? Novel is not any saying outside, one's own nature of the mind.
What is that big novel is? Novel is joy, love, kindness, and compassion, and appreciation.
And those all are beginning novel. And now I'm making many names, and one of those, you're trying
to summarize that, what is that?
Can you summarize that whole one I said is bodhicitta. What is bodhicitta?
Bodhicitta is love and kindness and compassion. And then, in the bodhicitta image, what is love and
kindness and compassion, and we can summarize that, what is that?
That's we can conclude it to the compassion. And what is that compassion is? In the normal samsara
in the world called good heart.
So good heart isn't the novel. And what that is, what that is, is compassion.
Compassion to who? To one's own self, as well as all the living beings.
And we expanded that compassion, one in the bodhicitta, whole in regular level.
Whole in regular level, we summarized that with good heart, but we extended that whole in regular
level.
And that whole in regular level, as many of you already know, love, compassion, joy, or reduce, and
then equanimity.
Why become in regular? Because this is bodhicitta. Bodhicitta means thinking of all living beings.
Not just the human being, that's also animal. Not just only the human being, the animal, but there
is also many individual beings.
Every living being that moves and that has feeling.
And that whole, our love, compassion, is prevailing to all those living beings.
So we can really sense it from the deepest of our heart, really we, and that is what in our
practice, the Buddha started this morning, we did practice.
That may all living beings have happiness.
We can sense it from our heart, all living beings we said.
Not just said only the human beings, or only our neighbors, or only our family, or only me.
We said all living beings, so have happiness, and the cause of happiness.
What is the cause of happiness? Cause of happiness is love. Cause of happiness is compassion.
The true compassion and true love are the cause of happiness, and peace, and harmonious.
Then we did pray, may all living beings have the premium sufferings.
And cause of sufferings. And what is the cause of suffering? Anger, attachment, agressive, and
ignorance.
Those are the cause of suffering. And so we mentioned that they all suffer, whatever they
experience currently, but also cause of that to every living being.
So that means with that anger and ignorance and agressive bond, what will come? Joy, peace,
happiness, apprehension, respect, and politeness, kindness.
All those we call so good. Why? Because it's so pure, so special, reflecting from heart, not just
from the emotional levels.
This is something we have been talking about for a long time.
It's something we have been talking about for a long time.
And those are the cause of suffering.
And this is something we have been talking about for a long time.
So those are like big innovators.
And so that means when we start to practice, when we are not practicing, when we are old, even when
we think about it, even for five seconds,
or maybe one minute, we really think sincerely, we are all living with happiness, the cause of
happiness.
May every living be the principle of suffering, the cause of suffering.
Genuinely thinking for one second or one minute in the busy mode of the speech, or in the helping
mode, or in some busy topic place.
And we think that that is terrific, is super practical. It is really so powerful.
And I think that all of us need to understand the cause of suffering, the cause of suffering, and
the cause of suffering.
It is something we have been talking about for a long time, and it is something we have been
talking about for a long time.
And we have been talking about it for a long time, and it is something we have been talking about
for a long time.
And it is something we have been talking about for a long time, and it is something we have been
talking about for a long time.
And generally, of course, also in the Buddha teaching, you have already mentioned how important
conduct is.
Conduct means activities of how we activate our mentally, physically, verbally. That is the three
things we have.
So if we can always observe our own self, our way of our attitude, way of the pronunciation of
saying, communicating with others,
way of physical activity, kind of guided with mindfulness, alertness, and consciousness, really it
will become so gentle and peaceful and meaningful, our actions.
So therefore, it is also, along with the body and the throat, there are all the activities trying
to give more kind of politeness, kindness, compassion, respectful,
more kind of low-ended looking, low-ended speaking, low-ended respectfully communicating with other
Sangha members or with other families.
But that bodhicata is not just only certain groups. Bodhicata is to our self. Bodhicata is to
everyone, to the family, to the friends, to the Sangha members, to all.
And we keep that. That means we are keeping the practice perfectly and beautifully. We are really
advancing to the path and boomis in the taking of prevention.
So therefore, this polite and the kind and the compassion, kind of more humble and more simple,
beyond the art, being more practical, our own self, being to ourselves as teachers and instructors,
to ourselves is really excellent.
And that is all our reach. You should try to do that, and I should try to do that. It's not just
that somebody said that and then somebody had to act.
This is all our, how to break the teacher Buddha Chhachaman himself when you read the life story of
all that.
How kind, how impatient, how thoughtful, how humble, how simple, how down to the earth Buddha.
Buddha is the highest teacher in the Buddhist. There's nothing higher and better than that.
You cannot see the teaching of suttas and how really Buddha is always communicated. Even Buddha
knows everything.
Buddha asks to the student, "What do you think?" and then says, "Yes, teacher, that's true or not
true?"
Always dialogue and that is not that the Buddha don't know. Buddha knows.
But even that, because of the politeness, the kindness, how that is really is so, I mean those are
the example points.
So trying to polite is so important, and the great master Shanti Deva said too, when you look to
the people, look to the kind in comparison.
And when you ask them something, answer very politely with gesture of respect. And those are body
activities, those are our practices.
So those are all normal activities. We never maintain that we feel happy and joy in the life.
We lead this world with quite happy and joy and no more regret, no more disappointment.
And that person in the teaching said in the upper life will have bright life and bright passage.
Play not moving in the dark to dark, play passage in the teaching method. So those are really all
the novel activities.
(speaking Spanish)